Okay, we're talking to Betty Warren.
All right.
You'll clean up my paint hat.
I've done close to a thousand of these in a few years, and I've never had a complaint, I have to say.
The tape recorder is... I used to tape...
no this is curious notes so we're going to actually look into one another which i find that when we're doing on television interviews and you can't i can't see somebody's else's face you get so disconcerted because you're looking at nothing and that's why i hate to do telephone interviews i really don't i try not to do that because i think this is kind of a record exactly and i think you're part of uh
It's not that much of a word sometimes, especially for an interview.
I think, you know, when you write a book, you have a chance to really rewrite and rewrite and rewrite and rewrite.
This is now your fifth book, I believe.
And I would say that...
The first four were decidedly, in one manner or another, very strongly autobiographical, I think.
Well, actually, it's not.
Well, the children's book are definitely autobiographical.
Well, I mean, there were resonances from your life.
Yes, yes.
Of course, I guess he was kind of a... Yes, exactly, exactly.
And my sister's story.
But you're right.
This is a book that I had...
written, trying to keep the history as far in the background as possible so that it isn't as historical as perhaps Spring Moon was.
And it took almost 15 years from the time I thought of it to now that sometimes now I know that I'm going to be talking about the book, thinking back on it, I hardly even
can find the strands that initiated the story.
I live by this myth that grapefruit just helps me with my diet.
I've been dieting for 20 years, I think.
No, no, no.
I was just saying that as soon as you finish
a first novel, you're thinking of a second novel.
And really, since Spring Moon was published in 1981, I've been thinking about it a long time, off and on with other books.
But nevertheless, you have that challenge of the second novel, which is both frightening and exhilarating.
Well, in some of the interviews I've read that you gave while you were working on Legacies and, of course, while you were posting to Beijing,
It was said that you were working on an artist.
Is this that novel?
This is that novel.
I hate to admit it.
I hate to admit it because it just seems like somehow you feel neuter.
I mean, you always feel nude when you go out there with a novel.
But you feel even neuter because you're older.
The word, by the way, is N-U-D-E.
That's right.
That's spelled by transcription when I...
No, not neuter.
Well, there were times I wrestled with these words, and it certainly helps to spell it.
But if this book has been thinking about it for 15 years or so, where Tiananmen Swear works into this, now how... Well, of course, the problem with thinking about... It's been changing.
It's been changing.
That's one of the problems.
I've written about, I'd say, a fourth of it before I went to Beijing.
And then...
I thought, being quite ignorant, I guess, or hopeful at least, that I would just pick up where I left when I came home.
But of course, having lived in Beijing for four years and growing older and so on and so forth, I came back and realized that I had to start all over again.
That makes for a better book, isn't it?
I think so.
I think because Tiananmen really marked my own thinking and my own life in ways that I...
could have never imagined.
When I went to Beijing, I was much more hopeful about what can be done within the party.
I think every Chinese, that my friends were anyway, they thought that
the party after the Cultural Revolution and everything else that Dung and his cohorts were facing, at least in the direction they may be going slowly, they may be going two steps ahead and one step backwards, but nevertheless they were for the opening and eventually there will be political change.
Then, after my husband's tour was over, I went back to really cover for CBS the Gorbachev
meeting, and then it happened.
And, of course, my experience there during those 40-some odd days was just both inspirational and depressing.
But it was, we should point out, a journalistic assignment.
Yes.
And were you able to...
Because, I mean, one of the tenets of the profession is detachment.
Well, I would not say that I was a journalist.
I would say more that I was a commentator.
So I had a little bit more leeway in terms of emotions.
But what I saw was so unique.
Because even the hardened journalists and the hardened cameramen, you know, usually cameramen, they're not quite interested in seeing, they're looking for that, wonderful pictures.
I used to see them come back from the square, sometimes with tears in their eyes, they were so moved.
So I plead guilty to being involved.
And when I came back and saw the aftermath,
I left on the Tuesday before the tanks rolled.
Tanks rolled on Saturday.
And was reporting from here through the pictures.
And it was such a shock.
It was perhaps again looking backwards.
I should have seen it.
It was in a way inevitable because these people had grown up in a system and their whole attitudes toward force had been there.
And I guess that's what, in many ways, that it seemed to be much more continual than I would have thought.
I would have thought the Cultural Revolution and the break with the Cultural Revolution and Deng Xiaoping's opening would have softened the kind of reactions to what was definitely a peaceful demonstration, but that was not to be.
So when I came from a moment, I looked at what I had written and decided
start all over again i think that one of the pluses of that certainly as a fiction writer because it is a novel that you having lived with these three principal characters for such a long time you know them you know the histories yes and the artist thing was that i um i had the three characters in mind
And when I went to China, I kept meeting people who had aspects of each character.
And of course, that also gave you a mirror in which to focus on the characters.
And how, for instance, although I'm an opera fan, I'm not an opera expert,
But the training of the stars and how so many of them have really no education, can barely read, which reinforced my thinking.
It is a believable thing that people who have talent can somehow come into a career that is startling.
Since we think of opera as grounded in the culture of Europe and very much the court and so on and so forth.
But it is true, I've met several opera singers who really was trained in the old-fashioned way and who did not have any education.
And their talent is so oral that it met the way in which
they approach it, and even they don't even, many of them don't even understand what they're singing, except they do because of the music, the music.
Yes.
So it's another aspect of a profession or a talent that I don't have, because I was able to
befriend so many people there.
I was able to have them describe to me how they did it.
Are there aspects of the characters, having lived with them now as long as you have, that you know that aren't worth it?
I mean, do you know them so well that you know elements of their history, their personal history, that you had to know, but the media doesn't necessarily have to know?
Ah, a very interesting question.
Especially since you reformulated the book.
Yes, yes.
There was earlier parts in the book in which Steel Who is much more of a happy-go-lucky and a rather promiscuous young man.
But that was in my mind.
But I'm one of those terrible writers who cannot seem to...
express the more vivid details of, shall we say, that aspect of human life.
But you know it, right?
I know it, I know it.
And it's true for them, even though it's not necessarily... Yes.
But does it help you as a writer to know these additional...
Yes, of course, of course.
When you have it in the back of your mind, in the foreground, it's like the background, and in the foreground you focus in.
And, although I didn't deal with it, and of course, the warriors.
Since I wrote his book mostly in terms of scene, because I find it easier to write, because I do not wish to state anything categorically.
I like to write it from the character's point of view so that the reader is involved in the process of understanding what the author understands as the scene proceeds.
I found it easier because there's so many levels of understanding of the characters of one another.
Sometimes one knows something about the other that the other doesn't know about the other two.
And in that way, you have attention in the scene.
The reader understands.
Because at one time or another, the reader knows more than the characters.
You know, a word you use a couple of times earlier in the conversation is hopeful.
And was this always intended to be a hopeful novel?
Because it is.
Yes, yes, yes.
Despite the, you know, the occasion for the conclusion, nevertheless.
Oh, I think I'm...
I wanted it to be a helpful book.
I wanted it to be that these characters really, despite all that happened to them, they do their best.
They try to be human beings.
They are forced to, by circumstances, or they feel that they have to, do things that are perhaps inexplicable in terms of the Western leader.
but after you have lived their lives as they lived it through the book, which I hope they will, is the understanding that perhaps the reader will say, aha, had I been there, I might have done the same thing.
And in many ways, I felt that way when I was in China.
I looked at these characters and had I been still hope.
I might have become a Catholic.
And I give several wishes.
I might have gotten on that stage and done things that are just so foreign on me and foreign from the reader.
I think always, I've often thought, you know, why do I write about China so much?
I've lived most of my life here.
At the age of eight.
do not expect to become a writer or really be so involved in China because I think I guess the fundamentally is because I want to have others who have not had a chance to know China or the Chinese people to come to an understanding of these people that do such incredible things and even
When I was in China, I found that many of the younger people who had not lived through the historical period did not know either, which surprised me, because their parents, as Summer Wishes and Mountain High, avoid talking about
historical period because they know that history will be revised and reinterpreted so therefore it's best just not to talk about it but the the acts
The things that happen, not the reasons or the motives, but the struggle meetings for many of the Chinese young, they have never been through one.
And they've never heard what happened to their parents.
And this amazed me.
in the same way that Spring Union did.
I didn't think I was going to have a Chinese audience when I wrote Spring Union, because I figured this is second nature in many ways.
But I did, because it was published while I was there, and I had young people write to me.
I didn't know this.
I think this is fine for us.
Thank you.
Would you like some more coffee?
I think one thing we haven't said and we haven't talked about background politics and things like that
Yes, I wanted to tell a love story, and how hard love is.
Anyway, but especially when there is also a
quote-unquote, mistress, which is history, and throughout the triangle, and also how one can love differently, two different people, and feel the tugs and pulls and the conflict, the terms, when, even though you have ordered them in your heart, number one and number two,
that sometimes number two love is not to be regarded as something inferior.
It's something I think that happens to people everywhere, whether it's in your family, whether it's between, as Summer Wishes says, between her and her brother, that love is so special.
to parse it, to weigh it, to analyze it.
I think sometimes it's a mistake because I was just reading The Good Husband by Gail Godwin in which she says something about there are many kind of love, including
those who are a match and those who are a mate.
That's a good line, isn't it?
Yes.
And so, as I was reading that and hearing her talk about it on the Diane Williams show, Diane and I belong to a literary club together, and she handed the members that particular interview, and I thought, ah, my goodness, I can describe it better, the two
The two kinds of love that you have, one's a match and one's a mate.
Tell me, because you have written a number of journalistic pieces, and your husband is a career diplomat, and yet now you're also a fiction writer and trying to tell a story.
Yes.
And are you mindful of the other problems?
Are you mindful of the political considerations and historical considerations?
It's not a political novel, to be sure.
No.
I have to know the background.
I have to know the history.
I have to know the politics.
But I write it in scenes so that the scenes are about those three people because I want
the reader to be involved with the characters and what happens to them so that history is not the centerpiece.
The centerpiece is always the three characters and their relationship to one another.
I don't have tremendous problems myself as a writer with putting that
all in the background, or in my head, or in the subtext for me, for the author.
I do have problems with people who read it, and who go at the story from a historical point of view, even though you want it to be
a love story, the reader brings their own wishes into the reading of a novel, especially a historical novel.
And they say, well, maybe I want to know about that period of history.
But only in as far as I can see.
And as far as my husband is concerned, I'm very, very lucky he doesn't care what I say.
In fact, all what trouble I make
I have trouble, we have trouble only in that we have both been accused of putting words into other people's mouths that we are each other's puppets, but believe me, we are not.
But it must have caused problems, I mean, in terms of perceptions.
Oh, yes.
And I'm sure that when you were in Beijing, that regardless of how much you try to hear these people that do,
There were no cross-influencers.
They didn't believe he was welcome?
No, no.
They expect everything that comes out of my husband's or my mouth comes out of pillow talk.
They thought you were responding for him.
You never know.
Well, actually, after Tiananmen, when I was...
Many of them, there were secret directives saying that I was the black hand of Tenermann Square, and I thought, oh my God.
Well, it wasn't even that, but how silly that somebody like me could have had anything to do with the instigation of...
of a movement that happened in 289 cities or something like that.
And a foreigner, no less.
But you have to put up with it.
You have to put up with it.
When you went to Tufts and then to Fletcher, did you have any idea that there were these writer's genes?
No.
Probably not.
And even when I wrote Ace Moon, which was the story of my sister coming out of China and her, the 17 years that we were separated from another, it was really not at all to write about, to write.
I just couldn't find anybody else who understood Chinese who I knew that was a writer who would take on the project.
And being rather young at the time, I think I was 23, 24,
I wanted to hear quite stupid, you know.
And so when I couldn't find anybody, I decided to do it without really understanding what it means to be a writer or what it means to get published.
So... He's one who just published his first book this last year, in 1952, I guess.
I appreciate what you're saying, but...
Is it fiction or nonfiction?
It's not fiction.
We'll talk about it if you'd like.
Sure.
Yes.
In fact, my book is listed for National Book Critics.
Oh, how wonderful.
Congratulations.
It's about bibliomania.
Ah.
Which is why when I saw the book made, I said, oh.
But that's for a student study partner.
Anyway, absolutely.
Yes.
Well, no, I didn't expect it at all.
When I was a test, I started out as a chemistry major, believe it or not.
Let me just interrupt for a second.
I did an interview with Amy Tan several months ago.
Her mother really expected her to be a doctor.
What is it about Chinese parents?
I mean, this is the mood.
Well, I think because so many of us have grown up in a situation where...
Science seems to be such an exact science and that it sort of mapped out the rest of your life because you would have a job.
You would be able to pursue it in a very linear way.
And it's palpable, too.
Yes, it's something people can understand.
Wedding is so vague.
It's so vague and you don't know whether you're going to make a living and you don't know who's going to read it.
But I think also for parents, it's kind of hard to think that
the person living with you has all that stuff inside that they want to get out.
Or that the secret place is there that the parents have never visited.
So you're studying science at Tufts?
Yes.
And then at what point did you?
I got an offer from the head of the chemistry department.
He said if I stayed in his department, I'd flunk out.
And that was sort of a motivation to change.
I agree.
I started Bates as a biology of A.U.
which didn't even last a half a semester.
I mean, this is not for me.
Well, one of the things I think that's wonderful, I feel myself a very lucky person.
And it's lucky in this country that at least as far as education, you have a second, a third, fourth chance.
And now that there's so much continuing education, I guess you have unlimited chances if you have the tuition.
And I think it still lets one of the great...
I totally agree with you.
It gives you the equipment in which to pursue anything else that you want.
Because at 17 or 18, what do you know about yourself?
I remember when I was appointed book reviewer of the Worcester paper book in 1978.
But I have to say, I shall never forget, it was very, I was in freshman English.
and uh professor higgins who was my uh freshman english teacher uh gave me an a for for for a paper that i did and it was the first time that i think anyone had said to me well but then it soon passed but i think that was the first initial
And somehow also we get the feeling because I was also a great reader.
And it always has been.
And so you feel that something as enjoyable as that you can't make a living with.
I don't.
I was blessed today when I had that book that I did a job for 13 years.
I made absolutely huge promotions.
It was a dream job.
A dream job.
To get every book that's published in New York.
To be off his regular basis like this.
In fact, when I left the newspaper five years ago, I kept this poem.
Yes.
You know, I'm freelancing this.
I'm not employing this paper.
But then it's even better because you can pick a Jew.
I've always picked a Jew.
I've always done absolutely the one thing I want to and what I have done.
I'm not going to yell at myself when I'm transcribed.
I want to have myself taught.
But I don't know if I told you this, but I've syndicated the poem.
Yes, I know.
It's in about 25 years.
That's my bliss.
Largely all university towns.
And, you know, where I work.
Yes.
And buy books.
So I just got to go to Jackson, Mississippi last week.
Congratulations.
And I'm in Salt Lake City, and I'm in Eugene, Oregon, and Charlottesville, Virginia, and Gainesville, Florida.
Well, that must be wonderful, because I know that one of the thrills of writing, I mean, it's a terrible, terrible,
Or dear, for me, anyway.
I envy any of these writers who could just sort of sit down and feel that, for me, it's a very, very hard, hard, hard work.
The idea of having readers and then now and then coming across them and having a conversation about people that only lived in your imagination and become real to others.
It really is one of the most...
rewarding parts of writing.
What I love about it, and believe me, is that the conversation is not the reason you do it.
You love it.
If I get 50 papers, it'll pay its way.
But it does allow me, first of all, I retain my validity as a journalist.
I'm writing every week for publication, and it goes out and it's in three or four meeting papers all over the United States.
And you're here, you know, and you know if you fail.
You know if you're still in the heat as the baseball guys say, you know.
And it's nice.
And when you're writing a book, it's, I spent eight years on mine, and you say, has anybody going to read this thing?
Has it got to be any good, you know?
I think those things are the occupational hazards of this.
I don't know, I, every time I come out with a Berkey, you,
You feel that you're going to jump off the cliff, and there's no safety net, and the anxieties, and I don't think one ever gets over it.
And then you happen to have to meet a reader.
I was just doing last-minute shopping for my toilet kit coming over here.
And a woman came up to me and said, I just finished your book, and I just think it's wonderful.
And it just, well, I don't mean to say that it's wonderful, but what surprised me was that I thought they were talking about a previous book, because they'd just gotten to the bookstore.
She said, no, no, no, it's your new book.
And I thought, oh.
Isn't that nice?
Yeah.
So that meant they had to have read it within one sitting.
Now, I think, Sir, because you write teens, they are very beautiful.
You are a visual writer and I can't see one of the films.
Yes.
I certainly think it would lend itself perfectly to a film treatment.
Have you had any kinds of... Well, we are now... My agent tells me there are several people looking at it, but who knows.
But beyond that, what was an interesting thing that I did was I did my own recording of the Dove version, and I also...
My editor and I also abridged it.
And in abridging it, I discovered that it was a terribly painful process because the words that you selected and the scenes that you selected, the way you have gone through, it's just horrible.
And yet at the end of it, I always feel such a pathological optimist that I think at the end of any trial, you learn something.
And then what I learned was I suddenly realized that I'd written a screenplay.
That I had learned through this process, that I had now, if I were asked to do a screenplay, I could, because you could not, what you could not do is extract scenes, because I think I couldn't otherwise.
Well, it's a linear book.
It's a linear book, and it seems to be.
Well, it's chronological.
It's chronological, and you follow.
The things that are linking, you can't just de-link and say, well, I'll take this part out.
Exactly, you can't.
But what you could do is make them leaner.
And what I did was that I learned that the only way you could take a 370-page book and make it into 70 pages or so is to take out characters rather than scenes.
And I think you'd really focus more on the dialogue.
Yes, the dialogue and... But it was interesting.
And standing up for three days before a microphone, I don't wish it on anyone.
I think what you have to decide is, look, the book remains the book.
Yes.
And this is something else entirely.
Yes, yes.
I think, though, that it's amazing, because when I heard...
My book read for the first time, because I've never bought one of those cassettes.
And this was for Legacies, the entire book of Legacies.
And one day, somebody sent me the version, and I put it in.
And I enjoyed it on another level that I never thought I could.
The oral level, which is different from the visual.
Did you agree?
I did, because it was read so well.
Again, of course, I'm a writer, and I hope that people buy the book and then maybe go into the oral part.
But words are interesting also, because what you can absorb with your eyes is so different than what you can absorb with your ears.
And again, doing the abritments, I found myself cutting partial sentences, too, that have more of an impact when you're reading it than when you're listening to it.
Your first language is Chinese.
My first language was Chinese, but I cannot write in Chinese because I was never educated as an adult.
Yes, I speak Chinese with my parents who speak English, and when I'm with Chinese, it automatically switches.
But do you start thinking in Chinese when you're born?
I'm not aware of it.
When I'm starting, I think of... I'm a one-language person, unfortunately.
No, I think it just sort of...
It comes, oddly enough, with a visual trigger.
I think everything with me is sort of visual.
When I see a Chinese face, whether or not they speak Chinese, I start speaking Chinese.
It's very embarrassing at times.
And the other way around as well is him, you know, people who look like my husband, who have excellent Chinese, not my husband doesn't have excellent Chinese,
But others who speak excellent Chinese, I still speak in English because the visual figure is the face.
And the writing, though.
And the writing doesn't... The writing doesn't... No, the writing only comes in English because the words are... They're not translatable.
In fact, the difficulty of taking a work that you've written in one language and transposing it to another, even if it's in the language that...
that is the local dialect of the place that you've chosen to write about, doesn't work.
It just doesn't work.
Do you have a sense of who your reader is in your writing?
And also, you said that you surprised the Chinese were reading there first.
Yeah, only in so much as I write in English, so I assume that most of my readers will not have an intimate knowledge of the history of China.
So I don't make it a mystery to them.
I try to...
to do it in a very, try to break up the lump of history into little crumbs and sort of scatter it throughout the book, hoping that the absorption of the historical context is again unnoticed.
I don't want to put it in the foreground, I want it to be part of the makeup of the characters.
The reader, do you have a sense of who the reader of your book is?
No.
Female, both?
Oh, I hope both.
I think the only person I say my reader is not is my mother.
Only because my mother, in this particular book, she said, you know, I hope you're not writing about the family, and I hope you're not writing about anybody who's pockmarked.
And this happened...
after I had written the first part of it, in which I do have someone pockmarked.
So I never give her anything to read until it's in between covers.
And your sister?
Yes, but I really don't allow anyone except my husband and my editor to read it as I'm going off.
This is when it's in manuscript, of course.
Yes, when it's manuscript.
And afterwards, or even in galleys, because I also do a lot of editing between galleys and final work.
So even though I may have edited 18 times, the 19th time, we're still editing.
comes with a book, and I, for anybody in the family who's not involved in it, except that I'm related to them, and I'd like to have them read fine.
And so, what are you planning next?
A novel?
Oh, I'm thinking about a children's book, only because I like to, it's a change of pace, but also
There's part of me that's mischievous and a humorous part of me that I find it's easier to do with children with that voice.
I love that other book.
What a contrasting such images, you know.
Eight-year-old Chinese girl in Brooklyn, you know, with the Dodgers and Jackie Pop.
Wonderful, you know, and her being a baseball player.
It allows you to sort of put this one aside and pick up something else.
And I don't know what the... I have a few ideas what that might be, but again, it's sort of in the gestation period.
And talk to me just a little bit about... Yes.
...we haven't had a question right now.
Yes.
And we're going to work with the creative place organization.
And, you know, apart from the book, if you could just give me a little bit about your own... Surely.
your own concern and you can just take it any way you want.
I think there are two things coming back to the middle part starting there that started me thinking about this book was many many years ago in the early 70s I met a man in Hong Kong who I spent some time with and
I was interviewing him, and he said, there's only one thing you have to know, really, when you write about China.
And I said, what's that?
This is very simple.
It's a word, peasant.
Say again.
Peasant.
You cannot forget the peasant.
And I think this also informs, not that they're characters in my book, but the idea that this was a peasant revolution.
is something that I held in mind as I wrote this book and the frustrations of the cadre or the teacher who has to deal with leadership that is for the most part quite uneducated.
And this doesn't mean that they're not heroes
in the ordinary sense, but those who make a revolution seldom are able to build a society that is, I think, the best for what I think is the
the civilized part of China, the civilized, the great civilization, the values that are, that have come through my genes, that have come through my family.
I feel that in writing this book, I wanted very, very much to
to emphasize being a little salad here.
And this I saw again because of my life there.
And when I came back, my work with Freedom House is based on the idea that every human being is worthy.
It's worthy.
Don't worry about your syntax, by the way.
It's perfect.
May I say, I'm listening.
And that
It's odd to me that in many ways, if you go back to the 19th century or 20th century, it was the Westerner who regarded the Chinese people as unworthy.
And now suddenly you have the Chinese government making the Chinese people a part.
Freedom Cross was started in 1941, when really you could count the democracies on your hands.
And now the greater majority of the countries in the world, whatever culture, whatever geography, are democracies.
Many of them fledging democracies.
And failing democracies.
And democracies is not easy to build.
But nevertheless, the idea that the value of human beings
the value that a government or a civilization should inculcate in the people is not what is happening today in China.
And I felt, really, this is why I write, I think, because these people are to be valued.
My characters are to be valued.
They meet life as honestly as they can.
They have all kinds of failures as human beings.
And they're selfish at times, and they do all things that we all do.
But in their own ways, they are people who need to be considered.
And how terrible it must be to go through life to think
that you're only important as a pawn.
Everybody in the whole wide world wants to be the master of their fate.
There's not anybody who says, I am born and I want to be a pawn.
Everybody wants to be, I want to have control.
I want to have some credit.
You don't necessarily want to be a king.
No, no, no, no.
You don't want to be a pawn.
And so many people today are saying, the Chinese, oh,
Let them make a living.
Let them eat.
That's fine enough.
That's good enough.
Why do we care?
They've never had democracy before.
The country is so huge.
Maybe democracy can't work in a nation with a billion people.
Oh, I'm going to go to India.
Exactly.
And I think when you get to know characters, when you get to know the individuals, you can't say you're not worthy.
You can't.
Because you know them.
And you understand why they have done what they've done.
No.
And I love my characters.
I'm not sure, and they may not be good people, but I embrace them.
I don't think I could live so long with them unless I cared for them.
And I hope that my readers will care for them.
I think that attitude is reflected so perfectly in that piece you wrote.
I forget which, whether it was in our bed piece or in our newsweek piece,
Your continuing concern about this young man who stepped in front of the tanks, what became of him?
What became of him?
We don't know.
One wonders.
They want an opinion.
Exactly.
But where is this important?
Yes.
What did they do to Hanover?
I mean, when you think of history, you think of images.
You think of that little baby in Shanghai by the railroad tracks.
You think of Times Square after the war.
There are pictures.
They call it the whole period of history.
And that man in front of the tank is indelible in this whole generation.
You talk about profile and courage.
I don't know what your schedule is, we're close to 10.
Oh, I'm fine.
I don't have anything until 10.
Okay, so actually we're pretty close.
Would you inscribe my book?
Oh, yes.
As I'm writing the first two or three or four drafts, always, I get back from my editor.
You're being too indirect.
You have to tell a little bit more.
Tell a little bit more.
Exposition.
And my problem has always been that I want the reader
to learn as they read.
So I try to do everything by interaction and also to stay away from, for want of a better word or cliche, that I go way, way off on left field or right field that I have to, as I correct and re-edit, to bring it a little bit more.
And one quick thing I'll ask you, because a lot of people might ask you this, and it's something you can think about.
Just tell me again, I know the quote for the title, but tell me the significance of the title and how long you had this.
Did you always have this title?
Yes, I've always had the title.
The middle heart is a separation of Chinese character for loyalty.
It's written with an upper radical and a lower radical.
And if you split them, it means the middle heart.
This heart here?
This heart, this heart.
And if you were to explain it, it would probably be the core of the heart, which is loyalty.
And if you...
think of China in the way that the Chinese refer to China.
It's always , which is said as , which means the Middle Kingdom, which was at the core of the world.
The Chinese think it's at the center of the world.
So the center of the heart and core of the heart is loyalty.
And that, I think, actually, that may have been the impetus, because it was the title.
It was the idea of
the Middle Heart and how different it is in America, perhaps, than in China.
Very seldom, at least during the McCarthy era, people equate patriotism with loyalty.
We always think of loyalty as personal loyalty, loyalty to our values, loyalty to ourselves, loyalty to a family, but not loyalty to
to the current administration.
Yes, that's a good idea.
That's a good idea.
I think actually this is odd because you triggered the impetus that I had forgotten.
And many times there was another interview
but asked me why I became a writer.
The same thing.
I went through this whole thing about not understanding what I did because I just sort of fell into it.
And then suddenly during one of these interviews, I thought, my God, I come from a family of writers.
I do.
My grandfather, my great-grandfather.
But I never thought about that one because I didn't know them.
But we've got my DNA here.
Well, there's... Yes.